2020 Apr
32252062
Ketamine metabolites, clinical response, and gamma power in a randomized, placebo-controlled, crossover trial for treatment-resistant major depression.
A single, subanesthetic dose of (R,S)-ketamine (ketamine) exerts rapid and robust antidepressant effects. Several groups previously reported that (2S,6S;2R,6R)-hydroxynorketamine (HNK) had antidepressant effects in rodents, and that (2R,6R)-HNK increased cortical electroencephalographic gamma power. This exploratory study examined the relationship between ketamine metabolites, clinical response, psychotomimetic symptoms, and gamma power changes in 34 individuals (ages 18-65) with treatment-resistant depression (TRD) who received a single ketamine infusion (0.5 mg/kg) over 40 min. Plasma concentrations of ketamine, norketamine, and HNKs were measured at 40, 80, 120, and 230 min and at 1, 2, and 3 days post infusion. Linear mixed models evaluated ketamine metabolites as mediators of antidepressant and psychotomimetic effects and their relationship to resting-state whole-brain magnetoencephalography (MEG) gamma power 6-9 h post infusion. Three salient findings emerged. First, ketamine concentration positively predicted distal antidepressant response at Day 11 post infusion, and an inverse relationship was observed between (2S,6S;2R,6R)-HNK concentration and antidepressant response at 3 and 7 days post infusion. Norketamine concentration was not associated with antidepressant response. Second, ketamine, norketamine, and (2S,6S;2R,6R)-HNK concentrations at 40 min were positively associated with contemporaneous psychotomimetic symptoms; post-hoc analysis revealed that ketamine was the predominant contributor. Third, increased (2S,6S;2R,6R)-HNK maximum observed concentration (C<sub>max</sub>) was associated with increased MEG gamma power. While contrary to preclinical observations and our a priori hypotheses, these exploratory results replicate those of a recently published study documenting a relationship between higher (2S,6S;2R,6R)-HNK concentrations and weaker antidepressant response in humans and provide further rationale for studying gamma power changes as potential biomarkers of antidepressant response.